PMCID: PMC11640589  PMID: 39682777

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), a serine/threonine kinase, promotes cell growth and inhibits autophagy. The following two complexes contain mTOR: mTORC1 with the regulatory associated protein of mTOR (RAPTOR) and mTORC2 with the rapamycin-insensitive companion of mTOR (RICTOR). The phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway is important in the intervertebral disk, which is the largest avascular, hypoxic, low-nutrient organ in the body. To examine gene-silencing therapeutic approaches targeting PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling in degenerative disk cells, an in vitro comparative study was designed between small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated RNA interference (RNAi) and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)âCRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) gene editing. Surgically obtained human disk nucleus pulposus cells were transfected with a siRNA or CRISPRâCas9 plasmid targeting mTOR, RAPTOR, or RICTOR. Both of the approaches specifically suppressed target protein expression; however, the 24-h transfection efficiency differed by 53.8â60.3% for RNAi and 88.1â89.3% for CRISPRâCas9 (p < 0.0001). Targeting mTOR, RAPTOR, and RICTOR all induced autophagy and inhibited apoptosis, senescence, pyroptosis, and matrix catabolism, with the most prominent effects observed with RAPTOR CRISPRâCas9. In the time-course analysis, the 168-h suppression ratio of RAPTOR protein expression was 83.2% by CRISPRâCas9 but only 8.8% by RNAi. While RNAi facilitates transient gene knockdown, CRISPRâCas9 provides extensive gene knockout. Our findings suggest that RAPTOR/mTORC1 is a potential therapeutic target for degenerative disk disease.

RNA interference (RNAi) is a commonly used approach for experimentally examining the function of a target gene [37]. Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) are the gene-silencing tools most frequently used for RNAi. The siRNAs are short double-stranded RNA molecules that target the mRNA molecules of a specific gene in the cytoplasm when transfected into cells. They support transient gene silencing because they eventually become diluted as the cells divide, which limits their use for long-term studies. However, shRNAs are introduced via DNA vectors and can integrate into the host cell genome, allowing for the stable and continuous production of hairpin RNA molecules for long-lasting gene suppression [38]. Despite the stability of shRNAs, viral vectors, such as retroviral and adenoviral vectors, have raised safety concerns because of their associated risks of insertional mutagenesis and immunogenicity, respectively [39,40]. Non-viral methods, while safer and simpler, face the challenge of lower transfection efficiency compared with viral vectors. Although RNAi technology can be used to knockdown protein expression for loss-of-function screening, the inherent incompleteness of protein depletion, temporary inhibition of gene function, and unpredictable off-target effects considerably limit its utility [41]. More recently, the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)âCRISPR-associated protein 9 (Cas9) nuclease system, a third-generation engineered nuclease, has been reported to be a fast and efficient tool for conducting genome editing [42,43]. Unlike RNAi, which temporarily suppresses gene expression by degrading mRNA molecules, CRISPRâCas9 can permanently knock out genes by directly editing the DNA, providing more robust and complete gene suppression. Additionally, CRISPRâCas9 can target non-coding regions of DNA, while RNAi cannot. However, CRISPRâCas9 also has some challenges. For example, off-target effects can still cause undesirable mutations. Furthermore, the DNA double-strand breaks induced by the system may trigger cellular damage responses, potentially leading to cytotoxicity. There are few reports on the use of CRISPRâCas9 for intervertebral disk degeneration, and the effectiveness of gene-silencing approaches for disk cell therapy remains limited [44].

We next evaluated how the RNAi and CRISPRâCas9 editing affected the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway in human disk cells. First, we confirmed again the efficacy and specificity of the selected siRNA and CRISPRâCas9 guide RNA sequences, presenting 53.8â60.3% protein suppression by RNAi and 88.1â89.3% by CRISPRâCas9 targeting mTOR, RAPTOR, and RICTOR (all p < 0.0001) (Figure 4A,B). Then, Western blot analysis demonstrated that the mTOR and RICTOR siRNAs reduced the phosphorylation levels of p70/S6K and Akt, while the RAPTOR siRNA specifically decreased p70/S6K but maintained or increased the Akt phosphorylation levels (Figure 4C). Similar but further distinct trends were observed with CRISPRâCas9 (Figure 4D). These findings indicate the consistent inhibition of downstream PI3K/Akt/mTOR effectors, including p70/S6K, and differential upstream Akt induction, the degree of which is more remarkable by CRISPRâCas9 than by RNAi.  We subsequently evaluated the effects of the selective inhibition of the PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling pathway by RNAi and CRISPRâCas9 on disk cellular autophagy. Western blotting revealed that all of the siRNA treatments led to increased LC3-II and decreased p62/SQSTM1 protein expression levels (Figure 4E). Then, the CRISPRâCas9 treatments exhibited more pronounced effects compared with the siRNAs (Figure 4F). The microtubule-associated protein 1 LC3 is a ubiquitin-like protein, present in the cytosolic LC3-I or phosphatidylethanolamine-conjugated LC3-II form [61]. The LC3-II is specifically associated with completed autophagosomes, indicating a positive correlation with autophagy [61]. The p62/SQSTM1 and polyubiquitinated proteins bound to it are sequestered into completed autophagosomes and subsequently degraded within autolysosomes, reflecting a negative correlation with autophagic activity [54]. Therefore, the observed findings clearly support enhanced autophagy [54], which is also consistent under the treatment of CRISPRâCas9 compared with RNAi.


To start deciphering cancer vulnerabilities and tumor suppressor gene hypersensitivity in TNBC, we performed a pooled genome-wide CRISPR loss-of-function screen using a lentiviral knockout library (GeCKOv2). The library contains 65,383 single guide RNAs (sgRNAs) including three for each of 19,050 targets and 1,000 non-targeting control sgRNAs20. The genome-wide screen was performed in the highly tumorigenic TNBC cell line SUM159PT (hereafter referred to as SUM159). SUM159 cells carry mutations in both oncogene (PIK3CA and HRAS) and tumor suppressor (TP53)21,22. While HRAS is not commonly mutated in TNBC, PIK3CAand TP53 are the two most frequently mutated genes in breast cancer, particularly in TNBC patients23. Indeed, as shown in Supplementary Fig. 1a, analysis of the METABRIC dataset revealed high TP53 and PIK3CAmutation frequency rates in TNBC patients (74.4% and 16.6%, respectively). Most patients with tumors containing the PIK3CA mutation also carried the TP53 mutations, accounting for 12% of all TNBC patients in the dataset. The PIK3CA mutation found in SUM159 cells is located on residue H1047 and leads to constitutive activation of the PI3 kinase24,25. H1047 mutation is also the most common PI3K mutation in over 2,500 breast cancer patients, as shown in the METABRIC dataset (Supplementary Fig. 1b)26,27. PIK3CA mutated patients showed poor survival outcome compared with PIK3CA non-mutated patients, while TP53 mutation was not predictive of TNBC patient survival (Supplementary Fig. 1c and d, respectively). Strikingly, TNBC patients harboring mutations in both genes had the worst overall survival outcomes with the lowest median survival (Supplementary Fig. 1e and f). As such, the SUM159 cancer model represents the most aggressive genetic features of TNBCs.


Nature Communications volume 12, Article number: 3055 (2021)
As illustrated in Fig. 1a, three independent biological infections of the GeCKOv2 KO lentiviral library were performed in SUM159 cells, with a minimum coverage of 400 times per sgRNA and an average multiplicity of infection of 0.3 (estimated to result in one integrant per cell). Following puromycin selection, 30 million cells were subcutaneously transplanted into immunodeficient NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice. A separate 30 million cells were snap frozen to serve as an initial representation of the pooled library sgRNA in subsequent amplicon sequencing (referred to as Cell Rep1/2/3). Thirty days post transplantation, tumor development reached the humane endpoint (>1âcm3) at which time they were collected as representative of late-stage tumors (Fig. 1b). Tumor samples were processed through next-generation sequencing and the pooled sgRNA abundance and distribution, following in vivo selective pressure, were quantified using the MAGeCK Robust Rank Aggregation algorithm28. sgRNA read counts for each gene were compared before and after in vivo selective pressure (Cell Rep1/2/3 vs late-stage tumor samples). As shown in Fig. 1c, all in vitro (Cell Rep1/2/3) and in vivo tumor (Gecko1-6) samples contained an average sgRNA library representation of 99 and 97%, respectively, indicating sufficient library coverage in both conditions. Of note, all in vitro cell samples displayed an even and unbiased sgRNA distribution, as indicated by the low Gini index of 0.1, while in vivo tumor samples displayed a higher Gini index as a result of selective pressure (Fig. 1d). This is further illustrated by the shift in the log10(readcounts) cumulative sgRNAs distribution curves observed between all Cell Rep and tumor samples (Fig. 1e). These results indicate that the in vivo selective pressure led to functional selection and altered distribution of the sgRNAs within the tumors, validating the functionality of our in vivo genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen. Additionally, the biological replicates showed an average correlation of 0.98 within pre-transplantation in vitro control samples and of 0.66 within tumor replicates (Fig. 1f), further reflecting the high reproducibility of our screen. Importantly, the in vivo screen generated both positive and negative gene profiles (FDRâ<â0.25) with respective enrichment or depletion of at least two sgRNAs per gene, while none of the 1000 non-targeting sgRNAs ranked in either positive or negative selections (Fig. 1g and h, Supplementary Table 1).




CRISPR decodes the RNA regulatory network in prostate cancer: A review from mechanisms to precision therapeutics
Splicing factor (SF)-mediated alternative mRNA splicing is a key mechanism underlying therapy resistance in PCa. A representative example is the androgen receptor (AR) [22] splice variant 7 (AR-V7). Due to aberrant mRNA splicing, AR-V7 lacks the ligand-binding domain, enabling it to constitutively activate downstream genes independent of androgen, which constitutes a core mechanism of resistance to androgen deprivation therapy in PCa [23,24]. Studies have revealed that CRISPR/Cas9, coupled with a GFP reporter system, identified that the splicing factor 3b subunit 2 (SF3B2) [25] binds specific motifs on AR pre-mRNA, promoting the inclusion of the cryptic exon 3 (CE3) and thereby driving the generation of the AR-V7 splice variant. Research by Whitton B. et al. [26] employed CRISPR knockout to demonstrate a compensatory balance between V-ATPase subunits ATP6V1C1 and V1C2 in regulating the activity of AR variants. Walker et al. [27] utilized a customized CRISPR library targeting splicing factors in a screen and found that knockout of microfibril associated protein 1 (MFAP1) significantly reduced AR-V7 mRNA levels. This intervention synergized with RNA polymerase II subunit A (POLR2A) inhibitors to kill tumor cells and enhanced radiosensitivity. Furthermore, database screening based on CRISPR-Score identified novel splicing factors such as LSM3 homolog, U6 small nuclear RNA associated (LSM3) and DEAH-box helicase 16 (DHX16) as essential genes for the cell cycle. These factors [28] promote PCa progression by modulating Cyclin protein expression to drive cell cycle progression. Genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screening revealed that the RNA-binding protein heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L (HNRNPL) is a key factor essential for prostate cancer growth. HNRNPL [29] primarily binds CA-repeat sequences within pre-mRNA introns and 3â²UTRs, regulating AR alternative splicing and thereby promoting tumor progression.
Studies indicate that aberrant expression of translation initiation factors can drive PCa progression through non-canonical pathways, specifically via epigenetic regulation. Wang et al. [30] designed dCas9- DNA methyltransferase 3 alpha (DNMT3a) to target and methylate the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A1 (eIF4A1) promoter, using CRISPR/Cas9 technology to confirm that eIF4A1 drives PCa progression at the translational level through the bromodomain containing 2 (BRD2)-MYC axis. In summary, therapy resistance and progression in PCa are regulated by mechanisms including mRNA splicing variants and translational reprogramming, and the elucidation of this complex network relies indispensably on CRISPR technology.
In the functional analysis of key transcription factors, CRISPR/Cas9 and CRISPRa [31] have become powerful tools for directly validating the mechanisms of specific transcription factors in PCa progression. Kim et al. [32] used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to directly verify that yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) drives transcription by binding to the CTGF promoter, and its activity can be inhibited by the drug GV1001. The Ikeuchi team employed CRISPR technology to knockout and activate AT-rich interaction domain 5 A (ARID5A), revealing that it activates interleukin 6 (IL-6) [33] transcription by recruiting RNA polymerase II and maintaining trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 (H3K4me3) histone modification. Furthermore, Tanaka Y. et al. [34] utilized a CRISPRa library screen and identified integrator complex subunit 14 (INTS14) as a novel positive regulator of MYC transcription. CRISPR/Cas9 technology further confirmed that small leucine zipper protein (sLZIP) [35] drives CRPC metastasis and antagonizes glucocorticoid receptor (GR) function by activating matrix metallopeptidase 13 (MMP-13) transcription. Estrogen receptor beta (ERÎ²) loss leads to excessive activation of AR signaling through downregulation of dachshund family transcription factor 1/purine-rich element binding protein alpha (DACH1/PURÎ±) [36], providing a theoretical basis for ERÎ² agonists to reverse precancerous lesions.
CRISPR genome-wide screening technology provides a global view of the core genes governing PCa transcriptional programs. Using this technology, ring-box protein 1 (RBX1) was identified as a top dependency gene in 17p-deficient CRPC, maintaining POLR2A [37] ubiquitination and short-lived mRNA synthesis. Chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 1 (CHD1) [38,39] loss triggers transcriptional reprogramming leading to enzalutamide resistance. High-throughput CRISPR screening based on the GeCKO v2 library confirmed that protein arginine methyltransferase 7 (PRMT7), by methylating the transcriptional cofactor forkhead box K1 (FoxK1) [40] and regulating downstream adhesion molecule expression, thereby inhibiting cell metastasis, is a key target for mCRPC invasion.


Alterations of p53 and PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR Pathways in Angiosarcomas: A Pattern Distinct from Other Sarcomas with Complex Genomics
Abstract
Background

The p53 and the PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR pathways are frequently altered in sarcoma with complex genomics such as leiomyosarcoma (LMS) or undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma (UPS). The scale of genetic abnormalities in these pathways remains unknown in angiosarcoma.
Methods

We investigated the status of critical genes involved in the p53 and the PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR pathways in a series of 62 AS.
Results

The mutation and deletion rates of TP53 were 4% and 0, respectively. p53 overexpression was detected by immunohistochemistry in 49% of cases and was associated with inferior disease-free survival. Although p14 inactivation or HDM2 overexpression are frequent in LMS and UPS and could substitute for TP53 mutation or deletion, such alterations were rare in angiosarcomas. pS6K and/or p-4eBP1 overexpression was observed in 42% of cases suggesting frequent activation of the PIK3CA/AKT/mTOR pathway in angiosarcomas. Activation was not related to intragenic deletion of PTEN, an aberration that is frequent in LMS and UPS, but absent in angiosarcomas.
Conclusion

Angiosarcomas constitute a distinct subgroup among sarcomas with complex genomics. Although TP53 mutation and PTEN deletion are frequent in LMS and UPS, these aberrations are rarely involved in the pathogenesis of AS.

Keywords: angiosarcoma, TP53, PIK3CA, PTEN, MDM2, P14, BRAF, NRAS


PMCID: PMC3775402  PMID: 24078813
Alternative splicing is a fundamental step in regulation of gene expression of many tumor suppressors and oncogenes in cancer. Signalling through the Ras-MAPK and PI3K-mTOR pathways is misregulated and hyperactivated in most types of cancer. However, the regulation of the Ras-MAPK and PI3K-mTOR signalling pathways by alternative splicing is less well established. Recent studies have shown the contribution of alternative splicing regulation of these signalling pathways which can lead to cellular transformation, cancer development, and tumor maintenance. This review will discuss findings in the literature which describe new modes of regulation of components of the Ras-MAPK and PI3K-mTOR signalling pathways by alternative splicing. We will also describe the mechanisms by which signals from extracellular stimuli can be communicated to the splicing machinery and to specific RNA-binding proteins that ultimately control exon definition events.

Downstream to RTK activation, the small GTPase Ras is loaded with GTP and activated. Of the three genes encoding for Ras proteins (K-Ras, H-Ras, and N-Ras), K-Ras and H-Ras can include or exclude an exon termed IDX and generate p19- or p21-Ras, respectively [44]. p19-Ras cannot interact with A-Raf or Rin1, but binds RACK1 and may act in an antagonistic manner to p21-Ras [42]. Alternative splicing of the cytosolic kinase B-Raf, a downstream effector of the small GTPase Ras in the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, gives rise to several isoforms devoid of the N-terminal autoinhibitory domain [20]. These constitutively active protein isoforms are able to activate the MAP kinase signalling pathway and to induce tumor formation in nude mice [20] (Figure 1, Table 1). Furthermore, alterations in the splicing profile of signalling components can also play a role in the acquisition of drug resistance. As an example, the mutant B-Raf(V600E) allele generates splicing isoforms that lack the Ras-binding domain and are able to dimerize in a Ras-independent manner [21]. Importantly, B-Raf(V600E) splice transcripts have been detected in several melanoma patients with acquired resistance to vemurafenib, an inhibitor of Raf activity used in clinical practice [21]. In addition, two truncated splicing isoforms of the cytosolic kinase A-Raf, another member of the Raf kinase family, negatively regulate A-Raf (Raf1) kinase activity by sequestering the upstream Ras GTPase activator [45, 46] (Figure 1). A-Rafshort which arises from retention of introns 2 and 4 is a 171-amino acid protein lacking two-thirds of the C-terminal region including the kinase domain [46]. In human head and neck carcinomas c-myc can induce high levels of the splicing regulator hnRNP H, which in turn increases expression of the full-length A-Raf protein, while decreasing the expression of A-Rafshort [46]. Another truncated isoform is DA-Raf1, which contains a premature termination codon, due to intron 6 retention. This isoform comprises of only the N-terminal Ras-binding domain of A-Raf [45]. Its overexpression impairs the tumorigenic potential of mutant K-Ras transformed mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts in nude mice [45]. Although identified in murine cells, it can also affect the activity of human A-Raf. In a similar fashion, B-Raf truncated splicing variants devoid of kinase activity have been recently identified in colorectal cancer cells [40]. These truncated B-Raf splicing variants are generated through several alternative splicing events, such as skipping of exons 14-15 or inclusion of one of the additional exons 15b, 16b, and 16c, resulting in premature stop codons [40].
Alternative splicing regulation of the Ras-MAPK pathway. Growth factors and cytokines activate receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) which in turn lead to activation of Ras. RTKs can be alternatively spliced to generate soluble truncated isoforms which act in a dominant-negative manner or constitutively active isoforms which are active regardless of ligand binding. Ras can be alternatively spliced to generate p19-Ras which cannot activate its downstream effector Raf. GTP-bound p21-Ras activates A-, B-, and C-Raf which can be alternatively spliced to generate inactive dominant-negative isoforms containing only the Ras binding domain (RBD) or constitutively active isoforms containing only the kinase domain. Oncogenic splicing factor hnRNP H inhibits the production of dominant-negative A-Raf isoforms. Raf phosphorylates MAPKK (MEK) which in turn phosphorylates MAPK-ERK. MAPKK1 and ERK1 can generate MAPKK1b and ERK1c, respectively, by alternative splicing to generate a parallel signalling pathway. MAPK-ERK can phosphorylate MNK2, which is alternatively spliced and regulated by the oncogenic splicing factor SRSF1. SRSF1 upregulates a prooncogenic Mnk2b isoform and reduces Mnk2a isoform of this kinase. Blue: tumor suppressors, red: oncogenes, and green: parallel pathway.
A fascinating example of the link between alternative splicing and signalling cascades has been recently provided by studying the metabolic effects, increased glucose uptake and lactate production, of EGFR activation in human cancer cells. The ability of EGFR activation to modulate the metabolism of cancer cells requires the expression of the PKM2 splicing isoform of pyruvate kinase M (PKM) [52], the enzyme that catalyzes the final step of glycolysis. There are two variants of PKM which are generated through alternative splicing of two mutually exclusive exons: exon 9 included in PKM1 transcripts and exon 10 in PKM2. The choice between exon 9 and 10 is controlled by polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB, also known as PTBP1 or hnRNP I) and hnRNP A1/A2 that bind to sequences flanking exon 9, thus inhibiting the selection of exon 9 and promoting exon 10 inclusion [53, 54]. EGFR activation acts at different levels in the expression of PKM2 by increasing transcription of both PTB and PKM genes. Yang and collaborators have recently reported that EGFR upregulation of PKM2, but not PKM1, requires NF-ÎºB activation, which is mediated by PLCÎ³1 and PKCÎµ monoubiquitylation-dependent IKKbeta activation [52, 55]. Moreover, RNAi-mediated knock-down experiments indicate that PTB mediates the effect of EGFR on splicing of the PKM gene but not on transcription. Thus, a coordinated transcription-splicing program controlled by EGFR activation is responsible for the expression of the PKM2 isoform and for the distinctive metabolic features of cancer cells.


Alternative Splicing Mechanisms in Tumors  10.3390/cancers15112918
2. Alternative Splicing under the Control of Driver Oncogenes
2.1. CMYC
The oncogenic activity of CMYC in different cancers has been extensively studied and well documented. This proto-oncogene belongs to the family of transcription factors, along with NMYC and LMYC [19]. In normal tissues, its level is low and tightly regulated on the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level. In cancers, CMYC level is frequently increased via various mechanisms: gene amplification or translocation, upregulation of signaling pathways boosting CMYC activity, post-translational modifications, and increased protein stability [20][21]. Activated CMYC is a hallmark of many cancers and is required for their initiation and maintenance [22].
The transcriptional program of CMYC and its intersections with other oncogenes have been broadly discussed elsewhere [23][24]. Here, researchers will focus only on the role of CMYC in the regulation of alternative splicing and its consequences for oncogenesis. The globally increased transcription induced by CMYC requires adaptation of the splicing and translation machinery. The shortage of spliceosome components and splicing regulatory factors affects splicing profile [25][26]. CMYC hyperactivation increases translation of a core spliceosome component, SF3A3, through an eIF3D-dependent mechanism. This affects the splicing of many mRNAs, including those involved in mitochondrial metabolism favoring stem-cell-like, cancer-associated changes [27]. Koh et al. demonstrated that CMYC directly upregulates the transcription of several small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particle assembly genes, including PRMT5, an arginine methyltransferase. This protein methylates Sm proteins that form the Sm core of the spliceosomal snRNPs U1, U2, U4/U6, and U5, and is critical for correct spliceosome assembly [28]. The perturbation in PRMT5 expression caused by CMYC leads mainly to intron retention or exon skipping and disturbs splicing fidelity [26]. CMYC not only causes overexpression of the most studied oncogenic splicing factor, SRSF1 [29], but also causes overexpression of several other proteins from the same family. Urbanski et al. identified an alternative splicing (AS) signature associated with high CMYC activity in breast cancer and showed that the change in AS is caused by the co-expression of splicing factors modules. They also demonstrated that overexpression of at least one module of the splicing factors SRSF2, SRSF3, and SRSF7 correlated with high CMYC activity across thirty-three cancer types [30].
The transcriptional activity of CMYC indirectly affects other oncogenes and key oncogenic processes by deregulating splicing. Through the overexpression of hnRNPH splicing factor, CMYC affects the RAS/RAF/ERK signaling pathway. A high level of CMYC and hnRNPH correlates with the expression of full-length A-RAF kinase. A-RAF activates oncogenic RAS signaling and inhibits apoptosis by binding to proapoptotic MST2 kinase. In cells with a low level of CMYC and hnRNPH, A-RAF is spliced into a shorter isoform that cannot bind to MST2. A-RAFshort still binds to RAS, but in a way that inhibits RAS activation [31]. One of the hallmarks of cancer is the conversion of glucose into energy via aerobic glycolysis instead of oxidative phosphorylation. This process is governed by PKM2, a pyruvate kinase isoform expressed mainly in embryonic and cancer cells, in contrast to the PKM1 isoform present in most adult normal cells. Overactive CMYC upregulates transcription of PTBP1, hnRNPA1, and hnRNPA2 splicing factors, resulting in a high PKM2/PKM1 ratio [32]. Zhang et al. found that another member of the MYC family, NMYC, similarly causes the upregulation of the same splicing factors, PTBP1 and HNRNPA1, leading to the expression of pro-oncogenic PMK2 isoform [33].
CMYC not only initiates transcription but also regulates transcription rate [34]. A pre-mRNA splicing occurs co-transcriptionally and the transcription rate influences the selection of alternative exons [13][35]. CMYC controls the transcription and splicing of a splicing factor, Sam68 pre-mRNA, in prostate cancer by binding to the promoter and increasing the RNA Pol II processivity [36]. Splicing factors (SF) frequently use an autoregulatory loop to control their own level: when SF protein level is high, it induces incorporation of a poison exon that triggers nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) of the transcript. In prostate and breast cancer, it was shown that CMYC not only increased the transcription of SRSF3 (and several other splicing factors) but also prevented incorporation of the poison exon [37]. The exact mechanism remains to be elucidated, but one may hypothesize that the exon skipping is caused by the increased transcription rate induced by CMYC. Selected effects of activated CMYC on splicing are summarized in Figure 1.
Cancers 15 02918 g001
Figure 1. Effects of CMYC on splicing (blue arrows) and the influence of altered splicing on CMYC (green arrows). Red arrows: increased expression; AS: alternative splicing; SF: splicing factor.
2.2. RAS and Downstream Pathways
KRAS, together with NRAS and HRAS, belongs to the small GTPases family, which under physiological conditions cycles between active (GTP-bound) and inactive (GDP-bound) conformations in response to stimulation of cell surface receptors such as HER2, EGFR, or CMET. KRAS is commonly mutated in human cancers; however, the percentage of mutations varies between cancer types [38]. Mutations most frequently occur in codons for glycine at amino acid position 12 or 13, causing KRAS hyperactivity that contributes to its transforming properties [39]. Signaling cascades are triggered by the binding of the active RAS to RAS-binding domains within several known RAS effector pathways. The most important, in the cancer context, are the PI3K-AKT and MAPK signaling pathways [40].
Lo et al. found that in lung cancer cells expressing either WT or mutant KRAS variants, the phosphorylation of SR splicing factors was reduced in those with mutant KRAS expression. This observation correlated with changed cassette exon skipping or inclusion in mutant vs. WT KRAS [41]. Correct phosphorylation of SR proteins by SRPK1 and CLK1 kinases is indispensable for their binding to splicing enhancer sequences on pre-mRNA [42]. It is known that signaling through PI3K/AKT activates SRPK1 kinase [43]; however, the link between RAS and SRPK1 activation was not directly demonstrated. In hepatocellular carcinoma, activation of the RAS/PI3K/AKT pathway leads to the expression of KLF6 splicing variant 1 (KLF6-SV1), which antagonizes the function of full-length KLF6 [44]. This protein is a tumor suppressor. The sorter isoform is an oncogene found in many tumors and involved in proliferation, metastasis, and angiogenesis [45]. KLF6 splicing is regulated by SRSF1 splicing factor [46]. Cheng et al. found a positive feedback loop involving activated RAS and an alternative isoform of CD44 (CD44v6) that can be a coreceptor of growth factor receptors. Activation of the RAS/MAPK/ERK pathway correlated with a preference for exon v6 inclusion. CD44v6, in turn, sustained signaling through tyrosine receptor kinases which activate RAS and downstream pathways, boosting cancer cell proliferation. The author suggested that this positive feedback loop could be a mechanism of the RAS-dependent pathwayâs activation in cancers without oncogenic RAS mutations [47]. Alternative splicing of CD44 is regulated by a splicing factor, Sam68, which is phosphorylated by ERK, an effector of the RAS/MAPK/ERK pathway [48]. The same signaling pathway may be responsible for alternative pro-oncogenic splicing of other Sam68-dependent genes, namely, CCND1, SRSF1, BCL-xL, and mTOR [49]. Notably, mTOR is a key effector part of the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway that can be activated by RAS [40]. The effects of mutated KRAS on splicing are summarized in Figure 2.


he Oncogenic PI3K-Induced Transcriptomic Landscape
Reveals Key Functions in Splicing and Gene Expression
Regulation

Oncogenic PI3Ka induces alternative splicing and isoform
usage of genes involved in growth, metabolism, and the splicing
machinery
To understand the global transcriptomic regulation downstream
of the PI3K pathway, we performed paired end, long read RNA-seq
in two isogenic knock-in cellular models bearing the PIK3CAH1047R
activating mutation: MEFs and human nonmalignant mammary
epithelial cells (MCF10A). (Supplementary Fig. S1A; Supplemen-
tary Fig. S1B and S1C). To assess effects of PI3K inhibition we
also performed RNA-seq in both models after treatment with
PI3Ka-specific inhibitors. An analysis of differential gene expres-
sion identified thousands of genes were altered by PIK3CAH1047R as
compared with parental control cells in MCF10A and MEF
(Fig. 1A; Supplementary Fig. S1DâS1F), whose expression was also
reversed by PI3Ka inhibition (Fig. 1B; Supplementary Fig. S1G;
Supplementary Table S3). These observations established that
PIK3CAH1047R was primarily responsible for gene expression alter-
ations in these isogenic models.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA; ref. 21) identified cellular
proliferation (MYC and E2F targets, G2âM checkpoint) and meta-
bolism (glycolysis, fatty acid metabolism, adipogenesis) as the most
significantly altered pathways in PIK3CAH1047R compared with par-
ental cells (Supplementary Table S4). In addition, RNA binding,
RNA processing, and mRNA splicing were also identified by GSEA
in the Reactome database as significantly enriched pathways in
mutant compared with parental cells, as well as negatively enriched
in response to PI3Ka inhibition (Fig. 1C; Supplementary Fig. S1H;
Supplementary Table S4), indicating that RNA splicing could be
an important effector pathway downstream of oncogenic PI3K.
Seeking to define the network of transcription factors (TF)
regulated by PI3K activation, we performed TF motif analyses in
our models. We identified the AKT substrates FOXO (22), NRF1
(23), and AR (24), as well as E2F proteins (25), MYC (26),
ELK1 (27), STAT5 (28), TCF4 (27), that have been previously
described to be regulated by the PI3K pathway. Our analyses also
predicted a panel of TFs such as PR, GR, RORA, YY1, AP1
(Supplementary Table S4), whose regulation through the PI3K
pathway had not been previously reported. To further define the
relevance of these TFs in modulating transcriptional outputs, we
interrogated the chromatin landscape of mutant and parental
MCF10A cells using the ATAC-seq. Widespread (n Â¼ 8,330)
chromatin accessibility changes were mediated by mutant PI3K
in comparison to parental cells (Supplementary Fig. S1I). Consis-
tent with our RNA-seq TF activity analyses, de novo motif analysis
identified AP1, ZEB1, YY2, nuclear receptor, ELK, TCF, and
STAT among the top TFs motifs enriched upon PI3K pathway
activation (Supplementary Fig. S1J). Altogether, our integrated
